From YouTube video by Matt Pocock: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_IK18goX4X8&t=82s

transcript:

I'm going to do something I don't


usually do for these videos and give it


a pretty hypy intro. One of the dreams


of coding agents is that you can wake up


in the morning to working code that your


coding agent has worked through your


backlog and has just spit out a whole


bunch of code for you to review and it


works. Now, people have been trying to


make this work for a while with agent


swarms and meshes and orchestrators. But


what if I told you that the way to get


this to work is with a for loop. I'm


going to show you a technique for


running coding agents that makes it


devilishly simple that is a vast


improvement over any other AI coding


orchestration setup I've ever tried and


allows you to actually ship working


stuff with longrunning coding agents and


everyone's calling it Ralph Wigum. This


is credited to Jeffrey Huntley and even


though this came out in 14th of July,


Ralph is kind of having a moment right


now. That's because this article


advocates an extremely simple approach


to agent orchestration and it requires


the underlying coding model to be really


really good and with Opus 4.5 and GPT


5.2 that have come out they are very


very good and it means that simpler


approaches like this are now really


viable and I think to be recommended. So


let's get started and understand why


Ralph is so good. Before we get stuck


into code I want to talk about what


software engineers actually do. I'm


going to use some terms from agile, not


because I really care about agile, but


most software developers out there will


be working in some form of agile


terminology. You usually have as a


software engineer a sprint of things


that you need to get done. Each of these


are little tasks that need to be grabbed


by the engineers and done before the end


of the sprint. A sprint is usually time


boxed, right? So, you start it on some


date and it ends. Let's say you can have


one week sprints, two week sprints,


whatever. But in the AI coding world,


you don't need to worry about time


boxing these sprints because the AI has


infinite amounts of endurance and can


work forever in theory. And so in AI


coding, this is really just a list of


tasks that needs to be done in some


order or another. So how would you get


an AI to work through this entire


backlog? Well, what you could do is you


could get 16 AI agents to individually


work on each task, but that would be


absolutely hellish because you'd end up


with a ton of merge conflicts and tasks


might have like little dependencies


between each one that it's quite hard to


spot by just looking at it. One thing


you obviously couldn't do is get a


single AI to work through each one


because probably these tasks are too big


all collectively to fit in a single


context window. So, the AI would get


confused, it would break, and you'd end


up with crappy code. I've got a video on


context windows if you want to


understand more about what I mean. And


so what most smart AI coders are doing


now is they would split this into a


multi-phase plan. An LLM would then be


able to work through each one of these


clearing its context as it went. You


could imagine this multihase plan was


actually a markdown file where it


explains each step that it needs to be


done. And you would create this markdown


file with an LLM as well. So you go into


plan mode in clawed code or something


and you would create this big plan that


the LLM would then in multiple context


windows go and progress through. This is


previously before I discovered Ralph how


I've been doing my AI coding. I make


these big plans and then I say okay do


phase one then do phase two then do


phase three. But one thing I've noticed


here is it's really hard to add stuff to


the plan. When you need to add a new


item here, then you somehow got to kind


of squeeze it between two different


things here. You as the kind of


orchestrator need to like the human


orchestrator need to work out where it


fits in the exact place in the multihase


plan. And of course, you need to figure


out all of these arrows here. You need


to figure out the exact right path to go


through. And of course, the LLM can help


you, but it's still a lot of work that


you need to do up front. And the thing


that always bothered me is that this


doesn't really reflect how engineers


actually work. Real engineers will take


a look at a canon board and they will


go, "Okay, I need to work on this task


next." Then they will take that task and


complete it, go back to the board and


notice, okay, that task is missing. Let


me find the next highest priority task.


Then they complete that and the cycle


continues until the sprint is complete.


This means that when you're designing


the sprint, all you're doing is


designing how it should look at the very


end. And so if you need to add a task


into this loop, all you do is just add a


new thing in there. You add an extra


specification for what the feature


should look like at the end. Now if we


look closely here, we have got ourselves


a loop where you specify some list of


tasks to complete. The LLM goes and


completes that task and then when all of


the tasks have disappeared and there's


nothing left for it, it then completes


the loop and it's done. To go back to


Jeffrey Hunt's article, this is what


Ralph is. Ralph is a bash loop. You give


the LLM some task to complete or list of


tasks and you run it again and again and


again until it's complete. Now, at this


point, you probably have a bunch of


questions about this approach. So, let's


dive into code to answer them. We are


inside a very important repo to me,


which is my course video manager. This


is an app that I built that I use to


edit my videos, to manage my courses, to


use AI to help me write articles. It's a


complex piece of code. And inside the


plans directory here, I have a Ralph.sh


file. Let's explain this line by line.


First of all, we set the error mode to


make sure that any errors in here are


thrown. The way you run this loop is you


run it with ralph.sh and you pass in the


maximum number of iterations you want it


to go through the loop. For instance, if


I open up a terminal here and I just run


plans ralph.sh, then it's going to yell


at me for not passing in the max number


of iterations. We then run a for loop


where we stop the for loop if we pass


the max number of iterations. In other


words, yeah, we're running this for


loop, but we do want a stop condition in


in case the LLM decides never to


complete. We then do a bit of logging.


We log out a line. And then we run


clawed code. It doesn't really matter


which one you run here, whether you're


running clawed, whether you're running


open code, whether you're running


codeex, as long as it's some kind of LLM


that you can or coding agent that you


can invoke via the CLI. We then pass it


two really important local files on the


file system. First of all, we pass it a


plans prd.json. Let's open that up to


see what that looks like here. This is a


JSON file with a bunch of different user


stories in it. For instance, I've been


working on a feature in my video editor


called beats where I can just specify a


clip to add a slight bit of a gap at the


end of it. In the UI, beats should


display as three orange ellipses dots


below the clip. So, you add a beat to a


clip. Verify that three orange dots


appear below the clip. Verify they're


orange colored. Verify they form an


ellipses pattern. As you can probably


tell, I've been iterating on this file


with an LLM to help me. Each one of


these items in this PRD product


requirements document has a passes flag


on it. This tells the LLM whether this


is actually passing or not in the


application code. And so this forms not


only a product requirements document,


but a to-do list. We can see that the


pre-recording checklist or let's go to


the one above. Delete video shows


confirmation dialogue before deleting.


We can see that that is passing in the


UI right now. In other words, this work


is complete and we don't need to do


anymore. So, as you can tell, this PRD


represents this list of tasks here. Each


one of these tasks represents a single


item in that array and we can consider


it passing when it's got that passes


true on it. Another important file that


we're passing in immediately is


progress.txt.


This file here is a free text log that


the LLM can append to with its learnings


as you went through. We can think of


this as the things that it learned on


this sprint. again implementing a bunch


of PRD items here. And so this


represents the LLM's memory for this


sprint. When we get to the end of the


sprint, I would usually just delete


this, but this as well as the PRD is


what the LLM sees going into its loop.


In the prompt, we give the LLM a list of


steps to complete. We say find the


highest priority feature to work on and


work only on that feature. I noticed


that it was often just choosing the


first one in the list. So I said, this


should be the one that you decide has


the high priority, not necessarily the


first in the list. I'll get to number


two in a minute, but number three says


update the PRD with the work that was


done. What it usually does at this point


is it just marks the right PRD items as


passes true and then append your


progress to the progress.txt file.


Append is really important. If you tell


it to update, it will usually just


update the entire file, whereas append


means it usually just goes and sticks


some stuff at the end. Just got some


loose advice here saying use this to


leave a note for the next person working


in your codebase. I then say make a git


commit of that feature. So it commits


the PRD, commits the progress.txt file,


and then it commits all the work that


it's done. So each time we're going


through a loop here, we're getting a git


commit. This is really, really useful


because it means that the LLM can query


the git history as well as see the


progress.txt to see what's been done


previously and to give it context for


what it needs to do now. And finally, we


say only work on a single feature. The


reason we say this and the reason we do


this whole PRD dance at all is to


prevent the LLM from biting off more


than it can chew. If we were to say, "Oh


yeah, do as many as you fancy. Just do


like a whole bunch of tasks." Then we'd


end up with the same issues that we get


when we ask the LM to do just do the


whole thing, which is that LMS get


really stupid as you add more tokens to


the context window and you'd produce


crappier code as a result. This also


means we need to be careful about sizing


the tasks, too. If we have one enormous


task here and then a bunch of smaller


tasks, then when the LLM gets to this


one, it's going to just be swallowed up.


So, when we design the PRD, we got to


make sure that all of the tasks are nice


and small to make things really as easy


as possible for the LLM. And to be


honest, this is just good practice


anyway. If you design massive features


that take huge amounts of time in your


sprint, you're not going to have a fun


time whether you're an AI or a human.


Now, we finally get to the end of the


prompt. We say if while implementing the


feature you notice the PRD is complete


output promise complete here. All of


this we have saved in a variable here


that we then echo out to the terminal.


We then check to see if it contains


promise complete here and if it does


then we exit out of the loop early. I've


also set up this nice little CLI here.


This is a total TypeScript CLI that says


notify that sends me a WhatsApp message


saying that it's complete after X number


of iterations. So that is the essence of


Ralph. You have a list of tasks or a


description of a set of tasks that you


need to be done. You have a progress.txt


file that you then append to and then


you run the thing in a loop with a backs


stop to make it stop it running


infinitely. However, how do you know


that it's going to produce working code,


right? How do you prevent it from just


running endlessly and just spitting out


bad stuff? Well, to make Ralph really


work, you really need feedback loops.


This is of course where Typescript comes


to the four, right? check that the types


check via PNPM type check and that the


unit test pass via PNPM test. Whenever


your Ralph loop commits, CI has to stay


green. One really easy way that Ralph


can fail is that it commits some bad


code and then doesn't know where the bad


code came from because it lost all of


its memory. This is another reason why


small tasks are good. The LLM is usually


really focused on that small task, able


to write tests that just cover that user


story. and keeping it focused on a small


change usually means it produces better


outputs, is able to see the feedback


loop just for that feature. It's just


better. By the way, another article you


should definitely read if you're


interested in this stuff is effective


harnesses for longrunning agents from


Anthropic. I took a lot of inspiration


for this article, especially in


progress.txt here and in the format for


this JSON based PRD, which is a


recommendation from Anthropic. Another


thing they recommend is absolutely


robust feedback loops. In the article,


they noticed Claude's tendency to mark a


feature as complete without proper


testing. But it did much better at


verifying features end to end once


explicitly prompted to use browser


automation tools and do all testing as a


human user would. So these feedback


loops are essential for the LLM knowing


that the code works. And again, this is


another reason to keep these changes


really small so that you still have


context window left for the LLM actually


checking that it works. Doing things


like hooking it up to Playright's MCP


server is really good but quite context


expensive. So you want to make sure


tasks are small so that you have the


budget to actually poke around and for


the LM to view images and stuff. Now so


far we've been talking about Ralph as an


asynchronous coding agent that can run


overnight. A kind of AFK Ralph away from


keyboard Ralph. But a modification we


can make to that is just stick a human


in the loop here. This is something that


I've been experimenting with for


difficult to implement features features


where I want to do a lot of steering of


the LLM. And it's also a great way to


learn Ralph's capabilities and


understand what it's doing. For this


setup, I have a Ralph once.sh file


inside my repo that I pretty often use.


It has pretty much exactly the same


prompt as the normal Ralph. Instead, it


just runs it in an interactive terminal


instead. So, let's actually do something


that I know you've been waiting for,


which is let's see it in action. I'm


going to run plans Ralph once.sh. We can


see Claude Code is running here. And the


first thing it's done is it's selected a


bunch of PRD items and it's choosing the


priority. By the way, I'm using Opus


4.5. I have Claude Max 5X and it's gone


for 2123


27. So, it's only going to do beats


display as three orange ellipses dots


below clip. And there's some nice


reasoning there. Without the visual


display working, the other beat UI items


can't be verified. Then, it gives itself


a little plan here and it's going to


start the implementation. Okay, we can


see it's create the beat indicator


component. It's added that into the


code. Then further down, we've got the


insertion point. Okay, there it is.


Added the beat indicator there. It then


immediately runs the type check and the


tests here. That all looks good. So,


they both passed. Does a bit more


verification and then it marks the PRD


as passes true. Once that was done, it


went down and edited the progress. TXT


file just here. And it even adds a


little note to itself saying, "Okay,


next you might want to think about this


PR item or maybe the beat playback


item." It then commits and diffs and


does all of its good stuff. And just so


I can prove to you it worked, we can


rightclick one of these items here and


press add beat. And we get this little


three orange dots, which looks great. So


yeah, I'm pretty happy with this


actually editing the video recording


software while editing a video that I'm


recording. Anyway, crazy. So I'm happy


with that. And if I want to run it again


and just do a few more PRD items, I just


run the same command again and it goes


through the loop again. That's something


you really can't underestimate with


Ralph is it's just so usable and easy to


use. Even when I'm in this human in the


loop version, I still feel like I'm more


productive than if I were to create a


multihase plan or something. This


concept of a loop where you just take


stuff off the board, take stuff off the


board and keep working is just feels so


familiar. and the multifphase plans that


I was doing before just felt really


ownorous to put together. Instead of


this kind of like really anal retentive


planner here, Ralph puts you in the seat


of the requirements gatherer. Really a


kind of product designer where instead


of focusing on how it's going to be


done, you just focus on what needs to be


done and how it should behave. And once


it's complete, you go through, read the


code, test everything works, and then


change the PRD if you need to. So that


folks is how I've been writing most of


my code. We have a Ralph AFK version, a


Ralph human the loop version and a


prd.json. As I learn more about this,


I'm going to invest more in my feedback


loops. With Ralph, you want more tests.


You want higher quality tests. You want


non-flaky tests. You want an MCP server


that can allow it to explore your


application. And most of all, you want


types, types, types, types, types.


Absolutely. You want the strongest types


you can get. Now, if you dug this stuff,


then you should head to aihero.dev. I've


been thinking about AI and talking about


AI and all of the stuff I've put


together is up here. My latest course on


the AI SDK allows you to learn how to


master AI in Typescript and it's


currently skinned in V5, but V6 came out


recently, so I'm doing a free update for


everyone who bought the V5 crash course.


But overall, thank you so much for


watching. This is a really fun one to


record and I'm recording it because I


just love this new style of coding. It


just feels so much more intuitive than


the stuff we were doing even 3 months


ago. And a final word, too. If you're


worried about getting left behind about


this stuff, if it all feels too hypy,


just remember that the dev branch is


always wackier than the main branch. We


are experimenting with stuff here and


some of it works and some of it doesn't


work and a lot of it changes. But in a


couple years time, we are going to


coalesce around some kind of shared


understanding about how to use these


tools effectively and that will still be


just as prized 2 years from now as it is


now. So with that, thanks for watching


and I will see you very soon. And the


fundamentals of development, which are


basically trying to translate people's


weird dreams into code, into language


that computers understand, that's not


going anywhere.